---
title: Syllabus
---

1. Introduction

    1. Lecture 1

        1. What is Functional Programming?

        2. What functional programming languages are there?

        3. Chronology / history of FP

        4. Course roadmap

        5. One cool code example

    2. Lecture 2

        6. Haskell and Types Introduction

        7. Setting up Haskell

        8. A first example (not factorial)

2. Functional Abstractions I - immutable data structures and map/filter/fold

    3. Lecture 3

        9. What is immutability?

        10. How do you program? Emphasis on recursion, map, filter, fold

            1. How this differs from imperative languages

        11. Go through lots of examples

    4. Lecture 4

        12. More examples

        13. Talk about performance characteristics of immutability

        14. Briefly discuss how immutability is implemented

    5. *Assignment 1 - Introduction to functional programming*

        15. Working with higher order functions.  Emphasis on map, filter, reduce, etc.

        16. Working with immutable data structures

        17. Exploration of laziness

        18. Introduction to Haskell’s built-in libraries

3. Basic Types and type systems

    6. Lecture 5

        19. The distinction between dynamic / static PLs

        20. The role of types in C/C++/Java: hardware representation

        21. Mathematical types and Russell's paradox

        22. Simple types in Haskell

    7. Lecture 6

        23. Algebraic data types

        24. Mutually recursive types

        25. Inference -- Hindley Milner systems

        26. Type classes as a sort of "Prolog"

            2. Encoding complex dependencies that are resolved at compile time

4. Functional Abstractions II - first class functions, partial application, currying

    8. Lecture 7

        27. Functions as first class objects

        28. Map - an example of a higher order function

        29. Lambdas

        30. Composition + implementing the composition operator

    9. Lecture 8

        31. Partial application

        32. Currying

        33. Pattern matching

    10. *Assignment 2 - Types*

        34. Algebraic data types

        35. Type classes

        36. More Higher order functions

5. Lisp interpretation and intro to macros

    11. Lecture 9

        37. What is Lisp?

        38. Decomposition of Lisp into a small core

        39. Introducing Clojure

        40. A few basic examples of Clojure, highlighting immutability, lazy sequences, higher order functions

        41. Introducing the idea of "code is data"

    12. Lecture 10

        42. Introduction to Macros

        43. Homoiconicity

        44. Creating domain specific languages / extended the compiler

        45. Lots of macro examples

        46. Threading macro

6. Functional Abstractions III - code as data

    13. Lecture 11

        47. A more theoretical treatment of macros

        48. Draw examples from *On Lisp*

        49. Go through "Programming syntax macros" (ACM SIGPLAN) and other important papers that discuss macros

    14. Lecture 12

        50. Discuss how to implement the macro system

        51. Potentially go through the macro section of [https://github.com/kanaka/mal](https://github.com/kanaka/mal)

    15. *Assignment 3 - Implementing a lisp*

        52. Write macros in Clojure

        53. Extend a basic implementation of a lisp written in class to include macros

7. Advanced types in Haskell: functors, applicatives, monoids

    16. Lecture 13

        54. Functors and applicatives

    17. Lecture 14

        55. Monoids

        56. The diagrams library - a nice example

8. Functional Abstractions IV - building up to monads in practice

    18. Lecture 15

        57. Examples of code that works like a monad, a la [this](http://blog.sigfpe.com/2006/08/you-could-have-invented-monads-and.html)

        58. Discerning the common structure

        59. The monad

    19. Lecture 16

        60. Examples of monads

            3. IO

            4. Maybe

            5. Writer

            6. Reader

        61. Writing a proper monad

    20. *Assignment 4 - Monads*

        62. Write a functor, applicative, monoid, and monad

        63. Use some of the monads covered in class

9. Concurrency in Clojure and the STM monad

    21. Lecture 17

        64. Immutability and concurrency: why concurrency is more natural in a functional language

        65. Review mutex based concurrency

    22. Lecture 18

        66. Go through STM monads / Haskell concurrency primitives

10. Additional topics based on student interest, project presentations

    23. Lectures 19 & 20

        67. Poll students on interest in possible additional topics, ex.: implementation of the IO monad, implementation details of immutable data structures, functional reactive programming, AI and functional programming, foundations of category theory and type theory

        68. Students will have the option to replace up to 2 psets with a project, so long as it covers related material and is of comparable complexity. Students who have chosen to do so will be given an opportunity to present and discuss their work.
